---
tags: [H-1B, H-4, US, visa]
---

As a Chinese, I applied for [H-1B] to work at [USD]. Before the application, a 
petition for **Nonimmigrant Worker**, form **I-129**, was filed on my behalf by 
[USD] and approved by USCIS. After that, USCIS sent me a **Notice of Action**, 
form **I-797**, where I got a receipt number to fill the [DS-160] non-immigrant 
visa application form online. I then used the [DS-160] confirmation number, the 
start and expiration dates of the petition and the receipt number to schedule a 
visa interview.

My family needed to apply for [H-4] visa.  The whole family had to fill the 
[DS-160] non-immigrant visa application form online including kids.  They 
needed exactly the same things as me, the [H-1B] applicant, to schedule a visa 
interview.

Since March 2013, one can choose where to apply, pay application fee, and 
schedule interview online at http://www.ustraveldocs.com. This is where one can 
fill in the [DS-160] and I-797 information. If the [H-1B] and [H-4] applicants 
plan to apply together, there is no need to create separated account for each 
person. The [H-1B] applicants can add dependents in his account, pay 
application fees for all of them and schedule interview together. Unless an 
[H-4] applicant needs to apply alone, DO NOT create separated account for this 
applicant, otherwise, the system may complain about duplicated profiles. If the 
[H-1B] applicant pays the application fees for the whole family, only ONE 
receipt number will be provided. It can be used for every member. Please use 
DIFFERENT email addresses for each applicants. It seems that the system regards 
email addresses as accounts. The same address for different accounts may 
confuse the system.

[H-1B]:http://travel.state.gov/content/visas/english/employment/temporary.html
[USD]:http://www.usd.edu
[H-4]:http://www.wikihow.com/Apply-For-a-Dependent-Visa
[DS-160]:https://ceac.state.gov/genniv/
