---
tags: [visa]
---

I went to the German consulate in Chicago today to apply for a Schengen visa so 
that I can attend a workshop in Munich about Ge detectors in October. My 
application was not accepted because the expiration date of my H1-B visa was in 
August. I was very angry about that because I asked the human resource office 
at [USD] whether I needed to update my H1-B visa. They said no, my H1-B visa 
should be valid until 2017, which was shown in my I-94 and I-797 forms.

A bit more search on Google revealed that they were both right. But they were 
talking about different things. [USD] was talking about my **visa status**, 
while the consulate was talking about my **visa stamp** on my passport. One 
needs to have a valid visa to stay inside US. My H1-B visa is valid until 2017, 
meaning that I can stay inside US legally until 2017 with this visa. The 
expiration date of this **visa status** is written in the I-94 and I-797 forms. 
On the other hand, one needs to have a valid **visa stamp** on his/her passport 
to **enter** US. The valid dates of the **visa stamp** can be different from 
the ones of the **visa status**. It is determined by the reciprocity table 
between US and one's home country. Mine was only valid for 1 year. My PhD 
supervisor in Germany once had a visa stamp valid for 5 year!

The problem for me is that even though my **visa status** is valid until 2017, 
my **visa stamp** expires way before. I can stay in US without problem but 
whenever I go abroad for a conference, I need to apply for a new **visa stamp** 
to get into US again. The ironic part is that I cannot apply for a new **visa 
stamp** inside US, because that is the job of a US consulate abroad. It 
basically means that I have to give up most international conferences because I 
cannot stay abroad for months just to wait for a new **stamp** from a US 
consulate - I need to teach and conduct research at [USD]!

I learned my lesson the hard way. Hope the post will help someone else to avoid 
going through the same painful process. Check your **visa stamp** before 
planning your international trips!

[USD]: http://www.usd.edu

