---
layout: note
category: usa
title: visa
subtitle: H-1B/H-4
---

One needs to apply for the temporary worker visa, [H-1B][h1b], to work in some
specialty occupation in US. Before the application, a petition for
"Nonimmigrant Worker", form I-129, must be filed on his behalf by his
prospective employer and be approved by USCIS.  Once the petition is approved,
USCIS will send the employer a "Notice of Action", form I-797.  The applicant
needs the "receipt number" to fill the [DS-160][ds160] non-immigrant visa
application form online.  He needs the DS-160 confirmation number, the start
and expiration dates of the petition and the receipt number to schedule a visa
interview.

Family members need to apply for [H-4][h4] visa.  The whole family has to fill
the [DS-160][ds160] non-immigrant visa application form online including kids.
They need exactly the same things as the H-1B applicant to schedule a visa
interview.

Since March 2013, one can choose where to apply, pay application fee, and
schedule interview online at [www.ustraveldocs.com][ustd]. This is where one
can fill in the DS-160 and I-797 information. If the H-1B and H-4 applicants
plan to apply together, there is no need to create separated account for each
person. The H-1B applicants can add dependents in his account, pay application
fees for all of them and schedule interview together. Unless an H-4 applicant
needs to apply alone, DO NOT create separated account for this applicant,
otherwise, the system may complain about duplicated profiles. If the H-1B
applicant pays the application fees for the whole family, only ONE receipt
number will be provided. It can be used for every member. Please use DIFFERENT
email addresses for each applicants. It seems that the system regards email
addresses as accounts. The same address for different accounts may confuse the
system.

[h1b]:http://travel.state.gov/content/visas/english/employment/temporary.html
[h4]:http://www.wikihow.com/Apply-For-a-Dependent-Visa
[ds160]:https://ceac.state.gov/genniv/
[ustd]:http://www.ustraveldocs.com
