---
tags: [Linux, SHELL, phys-492/592]
---

``` shell
$ # things after # is a comment, it won't be executed
$ # $ sign is the command prompt, it is not part of the command
$ /sbin/ifconfig # print IP address of the machine you are in
$ uname -a # print operating system information
$ cat /proc/cpuinfo # find out how many CPUs are there in this machine
$ cat /proc/meminfo # find out how big the memory is
$ top # find out who's using the resource, type q to quit
$ df -h # check the disk usage
$ pwd # (print working diretory) find out where you are
$ ls # list contents in the current directory
$ ls -l # detailed list of the contents in the current directory
$ ls -a # list contents in the current directory including hidden files
```

After [logging into a Linux machine using PuTTY from a Windows PC]({% post_url 
learning/2016-08-29-connect-to-Linux-from-any-Windows-PC %}), you may want to 
make sure that you are indeed in the machine that you intend to log in. Just 
as you get to a new place in the real world, you'd like to look around. You 
need the above commands to figure out the surroundings.

You may ask immediately "how am I suppose to remember the usage of so many 
commands?" The answer is "No, you don't need to remember, you *man* it":

``` shell
$ man ls
```

The command *man* shows the usage of a command in detail. Type <kbd>q</kbd> to 
quit when you are done.

You may also ask "What is this */* thingy there?". This is the sign to 
separate directories and files. The output of the command `pwd` may look like 
`/home/YouUserName`. That means you are in your home folder and your home 
folder is a subdirectory of the `/home` folder, which is in turn a 
subdirectory of the `/` folder, which is called the root directory.

You can go to a directory using the `cd` (change directory) command:

``` shell
$ cd / # go to the root directory
$ ls
$ cd # cd without any argument bring you back to your home directory
$ cd - # go back to previous directory
$ cd ~YouUserName # bring you to /home/YouUserName/
```

Now you can get around. How about create something here?

``` shell
$ mkdir bin doc # make two directories named bin and doc
$ ls # make sure you have created them
$ cd doc
$ touch test # create a file
$ ls -l test # check the time stamp of the file
$ file bin test # find our what are bin and test
```

You may notice the hidden files shown in your home directory using the `ls -a` 
command:

``` shell
$ ls -a
.   ..    .bashrc     .profile
```

They all start with a dot. One dot means the current directory, two dots means 
the parent directory. So you can use the following command to go up one 
directory:

``` shell
$ cd ..
```

and the following command to run an executable in the current directory:

``` shell
$ ./someExecutableFileInCurrentDirectory
```

You may see something like `.bashrc`. This is a `rc` file. You will meet many 
`rc` files in the future. They are files to save configurations of various 
programs. `.bashrc` is the configuration file for a program called `bash`. The 
full name of the program is [Bourne Again SHell][bash]. It is one of the many 
[Linux Shells](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-linux-shells/).

According to [wikipedia][],

> a shell is a user interface for access to an operating system's services. In 
> general, operating system shells use either a command-line interface (CLI) 
> or graphical user interface (GUI), depending on a computer's role and 
> particular operation. It is named a shell because it is a layer around the 
> operating system kernel.

Practically, the word *shell* almost always refers to *CLI* instead of *GUI*. 
In some sense, to learn Linux command-line is to learn how to use a particular 
*shell*. If you don't have any preference at this moment, please try to learn 
[bash][] first because it is probably the most commonly available and used 
one.

What does a *shell* do? First of all, it shows a command prompt after which 
you can type in command. A command prompt sometimes looks like this:


``` shell
UserName@HostName:~ >
```

or this:

``` shell
root@HostName:/ $
```

or something really fancy: 

``` shell
UserName@HostName:~ | 8:30 am | battery: 34% | :-)
```

It all depends on the settings in your *shell*'s `rc` file.

Second, the *shell* analyzes what you have typed in, for example,

``` shell
$ /sbin/ifconfig | grep inet | head -1 | awk '{print $2}'
```

This is a combination of many commands used to print out the IP address of the 
machine nicely. The *shell* needs to understand which words are commands, how 
to execute them one by one and how to pass output of one as input to another.

Third, the *shell* provides a set of key combinations, or [shortcuts][], to 
facilitate the editing of the command line. For example, <kbd>Ctrl+a</kbd> 
moves your cursor to the beginning of the command line, <kbd>Ctrl+e</kbd> moves 
it to the end. Search for *bash shortcuts* on *Google* for a complete list.

The *shell* also provides an *environment* for any command to run. It does so 
by bookkeeping a list of many [environment variables][env]. The following 
command gives you a full list of them in your system:

``` shell
$ env
```

The output is a bit overwhelming. For the moment, you only need to understand 
several of them. You can use the `echo` command to print out the content of an 
environment variable (case sensitive):

``` shell
$ echo $SHELL # The SHELL variable saves the type of shell you are using.
$ echo $HOME # the location of your home directory
$ echo $PATH # list of directories where executables are located
```

You can use the `export` command to declare or change an environment variables 
and make it take effect immediately:

``` shell
$ export AMadeUpEnvVariable="some random text"
$ echo $AMadeUpEnvVariable
$ export SHELL=/bin/zsh # switch to another shell
$ export SHELL=/bin/bash # switch back to use bash
$ export PATH=~/bin:$PATH # add /home/YouUserName/bin/ to $PATH
$ export PS1='\u@\h:\w $' # set prompt to be UserName@HostName:PWD $
```

These settings can be saved in `.bashrc` so that you don't have to type them 
again next time you log in.

Another things that are commonly saved in `.bashrc` are short versions of long 
commands. This is done by creating `alias`es of them:

``` shell
$ alias ls='ls --color -F' # color different types of files in the output of ls
$ alias la='ls -a' # list hidden files using new command la
$ alias l='la -l' # list details of all files using new command l
```

To write those settings to `.bashrc`, you need a [text 
editor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_editor) that can run in a 
*terminal*. If you don't know any text editor, try to use `nano`, which is 
installed in most of the Linux servers and very easy to learn for beginners:

``` shell
$ nano ~/.bashrc # edit .bashrc in your home directory (~/) using nano
```

Type in your settings, type <kbd>Ctrl+o</kbd> to save and <kbd>Ctrl+x</kbd> to 
quit. Use the following command to make your settings take effect immediately:

``` shell
$ source ~/.bashrc # starts to use your new settings in ~/.bashrc
```

It is a bit confusing when we think about the roles that a *termnial* and a 
*shell* play. Simply put, a *terminal* provides a frame, where a *shell* 
exists. The size of the terminal, the font used to display the *shell* prompt, 
commands and output, as well as the mouse clicks are handled by the *terminal*. 
Key strokes will be processed first by the *terminal* and then sent to the 
*shell*.

The middle click of a mouse in most of the Linux terminals would actually do 
the job of *paste*, the same as the <kbd>Ctrl+v</kbd> combination in *Windows*. 
Copy can be done by simply selecting some text in the terminal while holding 
the left button. Double left click on a word will select and copy the whole 
word. Triple click will select the whole line where the mouse is pointing to. 
Right click will most probably bring up a menu provided by the *terminal*.

[bash]:https://www.gnu.org/software/bash
[wikipedia]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_(computing)
[shortcuts]:http://ss64.com/bash/syntax-keyboard.html
[env]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable
