---
layout: post
tags: [personal development, health]
---

New Year resolution is not magic! You will be YOURSELF with or without it. I
used to get excited after setting some goals for the new year. At the end of
the year, rarely any of them could get realized. I regretted and got upset for
several days until I set up some new goals for the next year and this circle
simply goes round and round. I decided to end it by not setting any goal for
this year at all.

My life never changed with a beautiful wish. It was always changed by tragedy,
urgent situation or when I got inspired by somebody, something. For example,
when I was seeking a chance to study abroad, I applied only top universities,
avoiding facing the fact that I was not an outstanding student at all. This
sounded ridiculous to other people. But I myself felt really excited. The
result was obvious, I did not get any offer. But after that, I got extremely
grounded. I was calm and active that the same time, kept doing things that
needed to be done and got three offers next year.  I am skinny all the time. I
always wanted to get stronger, but never kept exercising for more than 1 month
until I started to watch video posts by scooby1961 and Elliot Hulse on youtube.
The former taught me how to be realistic on fitness goals and the latter
introduced Joseph Campbell's ideas to me. Now I have kept doing daily exercises
for about 3 years.

At the beginning of this year, I will simply remind myself keeping doing two
things. First, keep reading no matter how busy I am to get exposed to wise
ideas and secondly, keep throwing myself into uncomfortable situation to get my
butt chased by dogs all the time. And we will see how things turn out at the
end of this year.

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/4RYpzFZfcBU" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
