---
tags: [phys-332, South Dakota, grant]
---

![USD CTL MCI grant proposal budget 2015]({{site.exa}}/USD-CTL-MCI-grant-proposal-budget-2015.png)

Dear Members in the CTL Grants Task Force,

I am writing to apply for the MCI grant to **develop a digital laboratory to
enhance the teaching and learning of experimental skills for modern physics
with various mobile computing technologies.**

**Description of the project.** A digital laboratory will be established in
Akeley-Lawrence 119 to teach modern experimental physics to students enrolled
in PHYS 332, 498, 769, 788, 791, and 798. Tablets and digital pens will be
used to log laboratory activities in the format of hand-writings, pictures,
sounds and videos. Logs are saved as notebooks in EVERNOTE, making them
distributable, searchable and accessible anywhere, anytime. Web cameras with
Google Hangouts will be used to provide 24-hour monitoring of the laboratory.
Most equipment will be connected to computers, and their data will be served
for mobile monitoring through a local server. Google Drive will be used to
distribute manuals, collect experiment reports. Google Calendar will be used
to share experiment schedules. Google Sheet will be used to log experimental
data. Bar code scanning applications for tablets will be used to create
inventories of laboratory equipment.  GitHub will be used for collaborative
coding of physics analysis and simulation programs. Google Sites will be used
to create a mobile-browsing friendly web portal to all resources mentioned
above. The students enrolled in PHYS 332 in the spring semester of 2015 will
help establish the laboratory. The whole process will be faithfully recorded in
video.  The instruction and process of individual experiments in PHYS 332 will
also be recorded in video and posted on YouTube. The project meets the newly
established National Educational Technology Standards very well, especially
in the following aspects: Communication and collaboration, Research and
information fluency, and Technology operations and concepts.

**Dates of the project.** All the tasks are expected to finish in the spring
semester of 2015.

**Anticipated Goals and Outcomes.** By the end of the semester, we would
provide:

- A series of video tutorials on YouTube, describing experimental devices,
procedures, etc.

- A series of digital log books on EVERNOTE, recording experimental procedures
by both the teacher and the students.

- A website hosted by Google, serving as a portal to all resources of the
laboratory.

- A digital laboratory serving both physics research and education.

- A paper on a pedagogical journal, comparing the teaching and learning
experience from the proposed approach with that from the traditional one, based
on the feedback from students.

**Co-sponsorship.** Scientific equipment will be covered by my start-up fund.
Consumptions for teaching and learning, such as cables, LEDs, soldering
material, etc. will be covered by the physics department.

Sincerely, 

Dr. Jing LIU

Assistant professor, Physics

## Budget Justification##

The men and womenâ€™s lab coats are used to protect students and provide a
convenient way to carry a tablet. The digital pen, the table and the stylus are
used to write digital logs. The digital pen also comes with 1 year subscription
to EVERNOTE Premium, which is necessary to remove the limitation on the amount
of log books that can be uploaded to EVERNOTE cloud storage system monthly. The
camera on the tablet and the tripod are used to take video tutorials and blogs
to post on YouTube. The tablet armor case is necessary to protect the tablet in
extensive laboratory uses. The AppleCare+ warranty is recommended by the ITS.
The keyboard is to facilitate fast data input into the tablet. The external
hard drive is used to keep a local backup of all digital data uploaded to
various cloud storage systems.

