---
layout: note
category: usa
title: fund
subtitle: personal experience
---

NSF
===

Fastlane
--------

NSF allows one to submit grant proposals through
[grants.gov](http://grants.gov) (new system) or
[Fastlane](http://www.fastlane.nsf.gov) (good old system). One should ask his
local Office of Research which one should be used. [SSN](../ssn) is needed to
register a new account in Fastlane if one wants to do it by himself. It is not
always available for a foreigner who just arrives in US. A easy way to do it is
to ask the Office of Research to do it for you. The requirement on SSN is
bypassed this way. You will be given enough information to login afterward.

Compared to Grant-in-Aid from JSPS, Japan
-----------------------------------------

The *Investigator-Initiated Research Projects*, or *NSF base grant* is applied
by researchers in all ranks. A new comer will have to compete with veterans.
While Grant-in-Aid provides many categories targeted at applicants with
different ranks and experience. People compete with their fellows in similar
ranks.

Postdocs are not qualified to apply for NSF base grant, while they can apply
for Grant-in-Aid.

Reviewers are definitely experts in the field for NSF grant applications. While
the Grant-in-Aid proposal can be reviewed by people from similar fields.

The amount of fund is fixed in a certain Grant-in-Aid category and 30% of it is
for administration use. One should ask for exactly the same amount in the
proposal for research even though he knows that only 70% can be used for
research. The average amount of fund for NSF PHYS base grant is $100k/year. But
one can ask more than that as long as it is justified.

Personnel is not included in Grant-in-Aid, while it is included in NSF base
grant. Actually, a large portion of the fund goes to personnel, leaving just
small amount for equipment.

Budget Justification
--------------------

Give enough time for people in the office of research to fill the form of
proposal budget for you. If you give them only one day, they will sum up
everything and just put a big number there, which is hard to justify. You can
also maintain your own list in the budget justification, this way, you are
independent from the office of research. Collect quotations well in advance,
they help a lot in budget justification.

